# InfoVis

## LECTURE 3

### Perception and Cognition

To be able to fixate on something, we need to understand its luminance. The way colour is dealt with perceptually is quite different from how we describe it linguistically. There are two major sets of primaries. There are primaries for subtractive colour and additive colour. Additive colours (RGB) work with emissive media, such as monitors, stages lights. In additive colour mixing all the primaries produce white. If we got out a magnifying glass an looked at the colours of the monitor, we'd see a pixel of red, green and blue sub pixels, blasting away at full intensity. 

We learned subtractive colours by mixing paints in primary school and in the printing industry (CMYK). In subtractive colour, mixing colours reduces the luminance value. For many years, artists were taught in subtractive mode, but now artists working with digital devices need to be comfortable with additive mode.

Last week we talk about how we have many more cones devoted to red, and much less devoted to blue, the shortest wavelengths. The International Commission on Illumination sets the international reference standards. They have come up with a 3D chromaticity diagram showing the perceptible colours. Gammuts can be plotted ontop of this to demonstrate the range that the device can emit or print.

How does colour perception work? We need to learn about opponent process theory to understand this. Unfortunately it is a little more complex than simply sensing red, green and blue. We have a black-white axis, red-green axis and blue-yellow axis. If you place theses intersecting on an axis, you can create something like a chromaticism diagram. Colour pickers work very similarly. With a luminance slider y-axis, and the other axes mapped in a 2D plot. If we don't have that luminance representation the colour only is really uninformative. LAB is the perceptually correct colour mode. Luminance, A channel (red green) and B (bleu yellow) channel. We have trichromacy or three types of colour cones. For the luminance channel, neurons sum the output of the red green and blue, giving a single value. Subtracting the red and green cones gives that red green channel. To get a yellow blue channel, the red and green and summed, making yellow and then subtracted with the blue to get the blue yellow channel. A cone receptor mosaic shows a red cone dominance and less blue cones, but a large variation in quantity.

### Colour naming

How did these colour terms come about? Cross cultural comparisons show that colour naming follows a consistent pattern: black and white, then red, then green or yellow, then blue, then brown. It shows the importance of luminance and the importance of red, which we are most sensitive to.  Language can actually structure on how we structure the visual world. Colour categories are present in children even though we don't have language. Colour is linked to language. If we don't have a word for that colour, we have a different time spotting it. See radiolab podcast on colour, 2012, may 21. There is a shrimp that is a dodecachromat. We may have in there history of western culture developed new vocabulary for colour.

Colour blindness. The most common is red-green (protanopia) it is something to keep in mind that about 10% of your audience is colour blind. Yet another reason to rely on luminance changes. It is difficult to remember more than 10 colours. Maximize distinctiveness based on opponent theory and luminance. Note that the size of the colour patch affects the ability to correctly perceive it.

If colour is so information poor, what can it do? Breaks camouflage, encoding nominal data, attracting attention as long as there is a limited number of colours being used. If you have a complex natural pattern, you need colour to pick which fruits are ripe and ready to be picked. Colour can be used to map scales with certain caveats. Colour recommendations: be aware of cultural and conventional aspects of colour. Red could be associated with good luck in one culture and with death in others. Use low saturation for the background, and limit highly saturated colours for important foreground items. Blues tend to recede and reds tend to advance, but context is important. Blue can be made a source of attention due to its specialness. Our perception of colour depends on local context.

The standard model is that we have three kinds of memory: iconic memory which is very short term, visual working memory which is ~7 items long, and long term memory. Pre attentive features are pre consciously noticed within 200 milliseconds. Difference in angle, colour, size, enclosure, luminance, grouping, curvature and convexity are preattentive features that can used to take advantage of to create visual elements that pop. As we start to examine design, we will see these features which have been exploited by designers. Pattern recognition is a large part of what makes perception useful. Our visual system is very sensitive to changes in texture. Most people will perceive space via a texture gradient. And absent other visual features can give a sense of the surface. Flow visualizations have exploited pattern and can create visualizations of flow patterns. Tools allow us to create these visualizations, but we don't necessarily have good models for how to use these yet. Motion is another great pre attentive features. 24fps was the standard before 2000, 30fps is the new standard, and 48fps provides high temporal resolution or texture. We are very attuned to biomorphic motion and can recognize gait.

[Napoleon's march on Moscow](https://ageofrevolution.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/Minard.jpg), by Charles Minard was an incredible feat for the time considering the limitations (2 colours). The take home message is the defeat of the army due to weather, landscape and starvation. The difficult things to understand on first seeing it that the geography supercedes the message, it's like the London Underground, do we really need to understand the geographic route. The changes in direction occlude the changes in line width. The other factor is time. Since we're looking at geography the dates and time passage is lost. The temperature is only recorded at a few points and a straight line was drawn between them. It is an unfair assumption that there was a smooth transition. The temperature was not measured with regularity so a straight line is inappropriate. We need to redesign this and and any redesign the first step is to determine what the story we want to tell is. For this redesign the story we want to tell is the 
- change in number of soldiers to a from
- acknowledge the landmarks
- Record temperature if possible

Next go into illustrator and explore different ways of representing this data. We could use the graph tool in illustrator. Jodie enters the numbers of the advance and retreat in the illustrator graphic tool in one column to get a nice, continual grade. We get a bar chart, however, it misses information like when the retreat occurred, and details like here the army split off or directionality. You can change the colour of the retreat. We could instead show the data in a line chart, a donut chart. The problem with the line chart is that it will always be read linearly and it lacks context. You could put arrowheads on the lines. The stacked bar chart makes it look like the changes were recorded were consistent, but they weren't, they were recorded at different locations and irregular time intervals. Keep asking yourself if your redesign is make improvements. 

Going back to the graph, Jodie decides to use colour to encode temperature, leaving bars grey where the temperature was not recorded. White is zero degrees, -9 is given a medium blue/cyan, etc. since the geography is impacting army numbers, we do want to give some sense of distances travelled and landmarks where lives were lost. Taking the London Underground as an example, we could use intervals between data points to indicate distance and height between dots to indicate army number. The dots themselves might indicate temperature. We get the general distances between points from google maps directions. The max distance is 382 km, while the min is 72 km. Jodie decides to use points to represent them. Part of the story is actually mapping out the page and leaving enough space to include descriptions, explanations, others graphs. Part of the project is layout design!